.TH MU-INIT 1 "October 2020" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME

mu init \- initialize the mu message database

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B mu init [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBmu init\fR is the subcommand for setting up the mu message
database. After \fBmu init\fR has completed, you can run \fBmu
index\fR

.SH OPTIONS

Note, some of the general options are described in the \fBmu(1)\fR
man-page and not here, as they apply to multiple mu commands.

.TP
\fB\-\-muhome\fR
use an alternative directory to store and read the database, write the logs,
etc. By default, \fBmu\fR uses XDG Base Directory Specification (e.g. on Linux
this defaults to \fI~/.cache/mu\fR, \fI~/.config/mu\fR). Earlier versions of
\fBmu\fR defaulted to \fI~/.mu\fR, which now requires \fI\-\-muhome=~/.mu\fR.

.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-maildir\fR=\fI<maildir>\fR
starts searching at \fI<maildir>\fR. By default, \fBmu\fR uses whatever the
\fBMAILDIR\fR environment variable is set to; if it is not set, it tries
\fI~/Maildir\fR. The maildir must be on a single file-system; and symbolic links
are not supported.

.TP
\fB\-\-my-address\fR=\fI<my-email-address>\fR
specifies that some e-mail addresses are 'my-address' (\fB\-\-my-address\fR can
be used multiple times). This is used by \fBmu cfind\fR -- any e-mail address
found in the address fields of a message which also has \fI<my-email-address>\fR
in one of its address fields is considered a \fIpersonal\fR e-mail address. This
allows you, for example, to filter out (\fBmu cfind --personal\fR) addresses
which were merely seen in mailing list messages.

\fI<my-email-address>\fR can be either a plain e-mail address (such as
\fBfoo@example.com\fR), or a regular-expression (of the 'Basic POSIX'
flavor), wrapped in \fB/\fR (such as \fB/foo-.*@example\\.com/\fR).

.SH ENVIRONMENT

\fBmu init\fR uses \fBMAILDIR\fR to find the user's Maildir if it has not been
specified explicitly with \fB\-\-maildir\fR=\fI<maildir>\fR. If \fBMAILDIR\fR is
not set, \fBmu init\fR uses \fI~/Maildir\fR.

.SH RETURN VALUE

\fBmu init\fR returns 0 upon successful completion, or a non-zero exit code if
there was some error.

.SH BUGS

Please report bugs if you find them:
.BR https://github.com/djcb/mu/issues

.SH AUTHOR

Dirk-Jan C. Binnema <djcb@djcbsoftware.nl>

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR maildir (5),
.BR mu (1),
.BR mu-index (1)
